add: controlnet entry to training section in the docs. (#2677)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/training/controlnet.mdx

<!--Copyright 2023 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

# ControlNet

> 

Author: I think we can do for all the training example we have in a bulk PR.

[Adding Conditional Control to Text-to-Image Diffusion Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.05543) (ControlNet) by Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala.

> This example is based on the [training example in the original ControlNet repository](https://github.com/lllyasviel/ControlNet/blob/main/docs/train.md). It trains a ControlNet to fill circles using a [small synthetic dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/fusing/fill50k).

Author: I think it's not actually a guide, though. We are just showing how to use the example script and not discussing the training methodology (for which the script is there).

> This example is based on the [training example in the original ControlNet repository](https://github.com/lllyasviel/ControlNet/blob/main/docs/train.md). It trains a ControlNet to fill circles using a [small synthetic dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/fusing/fill50k).

Reviewer: I think this is the same thing even if you aren't discussing the training methodology. By showing how to do something, you're still guiding the user. I'm fine with either way though :)

> This example is based on the [training example in the original ControlNet repository](https://github.com/lllyasviel/ControlNet/blob/main/docs/train.md). It trains a ControlNet to fill circles using a [small synthetic dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/fusing/fill50k).

Author: Ah I see your point!

How about we merge it as is for now and then maybe you could open a PR updating all the examples to have a short intro section? 

@mishig25 is working on https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/pull/2718 which would make it simpler to keep the doc of the training section in sync with our READMEs. WDYT?

```bash
accelerate config
```

Or for a default accelerate configuration without answering questions about your environment

```bash
accelerate config default
```

Or if your environment doesn't support an interactive shell e.g. a notebook

```python
from accelerate.utils import write_basic_config

write_basic_config()
```

## Circle filling dataset

The original dataset is hosted in the [ControlNet repo](https://huggingface.co/lllyasviel/ControlNet/blob/main/training/fill50k.zip). We re-uploaded it to be compatible with `datasets` [here](https://huggingface.co/datasets/fusing/fill50k). Note that `datasets` handles dataloading within the training script.

Our training examples use [Stable Diffusion 1.5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5) as the original set of ControlNet models were trained from it. However, ControlNet can be trained to augment any Stable Diffusion compatible model (such as [CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4)) or [stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1).

## Training

> Our training examples use two test conditioning images. They can be downloaded by running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Download the following images to condition our training with:
```

```sh
wget https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/controlnet_training/conditioning_image_1.png

wget https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/controlnet_training/conditioning_image_2.png
```

```bash
export MODEL_DIR="runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5"
export OUTPUT_DIR="path to save model"

accelerate launch train_controlnet.py \
 --pretrained_model_name_or_path=$MODEL_DIR \
 --output_dir=$OUTPUT_DIR \
 --dataset_name=fusing/fill50k \
 --resolution=512 \
 --learning_rate=1e-5 \
 --validation_image "./conditioning_image_1.png" "./conditioning_image_2.png" \
 --validation_prompt "red circle with blue background" "cyan circle with brown floral background" \
 --train_batch_size=4
```

This default configuration requires ~38GB VRAM.

By default, the training script logs outputs to tensorboard. Pass `--report_to wandb` to use weights and

> biases.

Reviewer: I'd put this before showing launching the script, so the user knows what to fully expect and that they can use W&B if they wanted to

Author: We usually show the default configs first in the examples. `wandb` is not a default one and also requires an additional dependency to be installed.

> By default, the training script logs outputs to tensorboard. Pass `--report_to wandb` to use weights and
> biases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the training script logs outputs to tensorboard. Pass `--report_to wandb` to use Weights &
Biases.
```

Gradient accumulation with a smaller batch size can be used to reduce training requirements to ~20 GB VRAM.

```bash
export MODEL_DIR="runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5"
export OUTPUT_DIR="path to save model"

accelerate launch train_controlnet.py \
 --pretrained_model_name_or_path=$MODEL_DIR \
 --output_dir=$OUTPUT_DIR \
 --dataset_name=fusing/fill50k \
 --resolution=512 \
 --learning_rate=1e-5 \
 --validation_image "./conditioning_image_1.png" "./conditioning_image_2.png" \
 --validation_prompt "red circle with blue background" "cyan circle with brown floral background" \
 --train_batch_size=1 \
 --gradient_accumulation_steps=4
```

## Example results

> #### After 300 steps with batch size 8

Reviewer: I don't think these (Example results, and after 300/600 steps) need to be headers since its a continuation of running the training script and should be on the same hierarchical level; it can just be regular text saying after 300 steps with batch size 8 (same with the header below)

Author: Bulk update candidate I believe since this is what we follow for the all the other training examples.

#### After 6000 steps with batch size 8:

| |  | 
|-------------------|:-------------------------:|
| | red circle with blue background  | 
![conditioning image](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/controlnet_training/conditioning_image_1.png) | ![red circle with blue background](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/controlnet_training/red_circle_with_blue_background_6000_steps.png) |
| | cyan circle with brown floral background | 
![conditioning image](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/controlnet_training/conditioning_image_2.png) | ![cyan circle with brown floral background](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/controlnet_training/cyan_circle_with_brown_floral_background_6000_steps.png) |

## Training on a 16 GB GPU

> Optimizations:
> - Gradient checkpointing
> - bitsandbyte's 8-bit optimizer
> 
> [bitandbytes install instructions](https://github.com/TimDettmers/bitsandbytes#requirements--installation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable the following optimizations to train on a 16GB GPU:

- Gradient checkpointing
- bitsandbyte's 8-bit optimizer (take a look at the [installation]((https://github.com/TimDettmers/bitsandbytes#requirements--installation) instructions if you don't already have it installed)

Now you can launch the training script:
```

```bash
export MODEL_DIR="runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5"
export OUTPUT_DIR="path to save model"

accelerate launch train_controlnet.py \
 --pretrained_model_name_or_path=$MODEL_DIR \
 --output_dir=$OUTPUT_DIR \
 --dataset_name=fusing/fill50k \
 --resolution=512 \
 --learning_rate=1e-5 \
 --validation_image "./conditioning_image_1.png" "./conditioning_image_2.png" \
 --validation_prompt "red circle with blue background" "cyan circle with brown floral background" \
 --train_batch_size=1 \
 --gradient_accumulation_steps=4 \
 --gradient_checkpointing \
 --use_8bit_adam
```

## Training on a 12 GB GPU

> Optimizations:
> - Gradient checkpointing
> - bitsandbyte's 8-bit optimizer
> - xformers
> - set grads to none

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable the following optimizations to train on a 12GB GPU:
- Gradient checkpointing
- bitsandbyte's 8-bit optimizer (take a look at the [installation]((https://github.com/TimDettmers/bitsandbytes#requirements--installation) instructions if you don't already have it installed)
- xFormers (take a look at the [installation](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/training/optimization/xformers) instructions if you don't already have it installed)
- set gradients to `None`
```

```bash
export MODEL_DIR="runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5"
export OUTPUT_DIR="path to save model"

accelerate launch train_controlnet.py \
 --pretrained_model_name_or_path=$MODEL_DIR \
 --output_dir=$OUTPUT_DIR \
 --dataset_name=fusing/fill50k \
 --resolution=512 \
 --learning_rate=1e-5 \
 --validation_image "./conditioning_image_1.png" "./conditioning_image_2.png" \
 --validation_prompt "red circle with blue background" "cyan circle with brown floral background" \
 --train_batch_size=1 \
 --gradient_accumulation_steps=4 \
 --gradient_checkpointing \
 --use_8bit_adam \
 --enable_xformers_memory_efficient_attention \
 --set_grads_to_none
```

> When using `enable_xformers_memory_efficient_attention`, please make sure to install `xformers` by `pip install xformers`. 

Reviewer: It'd be better to have this info up front before launching the script I think

Author: Same as what I said regarding `wandb`.

## Training on an 8 GB GPU

We have not exhaustively tested DeepSpeed support for ControlNet. While the configuration does

> save memory, we have not confirmed the configuration to train successfully. You will very likely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
save memory, we have not confirmed whether the configuration trains successfully. You will very likely
```

have to make changes to the config to have a successful training run.

> Optimizations:
> - Gradient checkpointing
> - xformers
> - set grads to none
> - DeepSpeed stage 2 with parameter and optimizer offloading
> - fp16 mixed precision

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable the following optimizations to train on a 8GB GPU:
- Gradient checkpointing
- bitsandbyte's 8-bit optimizer (take a look at the [installation]((https://github.com/TimDettmers/bitsandbytes#requirements--installation) instructions if you don't already have it installed)
- xFormers (take a look at the [installation](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/training/optimization/xformers) instructions if you don't already have it installed)
- set gradients to `None`
- DeepSpeed stage 2 with parameter and optimizer offloading
- fp16 mixed precision
```

[DeepSpeed](https://www.deepspeed.ai/) can offload tensors from VRAM to either 
CPU or NVME. This requires significantly more RAM (about 25 GB).

> Use `accelerate config` to enable DeepSpeed stage 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll have to configure your environment with `accelerate config` to enable DeepSpeed stage 2.
```

> The relevant parts of the resulting accelerate config file are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration file should look like this:
```

```yaml
compute_environment: LOCAL_MACHINE
deepspeed_config:
  gradient_accumulation_steps: 4
  offload_optimizer_device: cpu
  offload_param_device: cpu
  zero3_init_flag: false
  zero_stage: 2
distributed_type: DEEPSPEED
```

> See [documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/usage_guides/deepspeed) for more DeepSpeed configuration options.

Reviewer: Maybe wrap this in a `<Tip>`?

Changing the default Adam optimizer to DeepSpeed's Adam
`deepspeed.ops.adam.DeepSpeedCPUAdam` gives a substantial speedup but

> it requires CUDA toolchain with the same version as pytorch. 8-bit optimizer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it requires a CUDA toolchain with the same version as PyTorch. 8-bit optimizer
```

does not seem to be compatible with DeepSpeed at the moment.

```bash
export MODEL_DIR="runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5"
export OUTPUT_DIR="path to save model"

accelerate launch train_controlnet.py \
 --pretrained_model_name_or_path=$MODEL_DIR \
 --output_dir=$OUTPUT_DIR \
 --dataset_name=fusing/fill50k \
 --resolution=512 \
 --validation_image "./conditioning_image_1.png" "./conditioning_image_2.png" \
 --validation_prompt "red circle with blue background" "cyan circle with brown floral background" \
 --train_batch_size=1 \
 --gradient_accumulation_steps=4 \
 --gradient_checkpointing \
 --enable_xformers_memory_efficient_attention \
 --set_grads_to_none \
 --mixed_precision fp16
```

> ## Performing inference with the trained ControlNet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Inference
```

> The trained model can be run the same as the original ControlNet pipeline with the newly trained ControlNet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trained model can be run with the [`StableDiffusionControlNetPipeline`].
```
